Laboratory 2
PLAN AND IMPLEMENT THE REQUEST DATA MODEL
Instructions:
1. Work with the same partner from Laboratory 1. Continue using the Laravel request-system
project, MySQL database, and GitHub repository you established together in that activity.
2. Open the project and verify that its local .env connects to the existing MySQL database.
Record the database name in your documentation without showing the password.
 Example command: php artisan migrate:status
3. Write three user stories: one for a requester, one for a staff reviewer, and one for a record
keeper. Use the format:
"As a [role], I want [action] so that [benefit]."
Write at least two testable acceptance criteria for each story. Keep the stories focused
on the data this laboratory will store.
4. Draw one table labeled requests and create a data dictionary showing each field name, data
type, constraint, and purpose.
5. Use these required fields in the requests table:
 id - primary key; unique request number
 requester_name - string(100), required; person submitting the request
 requester_email - string(255), required; contact address
 item_name - string(150), required; requested item or service
 quantity - unsignedInteger, required; requested quantity
 purpose - text, required; reason for the request
 status - string(20), default pending; request state
 created_at and updated_at - timestamps; creation and update times
6. Explain why the request quantity must be greater than zero and why a new request begins
 with pending status. An unsigned integer permits zero; apply the positive-quantity rule to
 sample entries now and to application validation in a later laboratory.
7. Create a migration file in the existing project:
 php artisan make:migration create_requests_table
8. In the migration up() method, create the requests table with all required fields. In down(),
 drop that table so the migration can be reversed.
9. Review the table name, spelling, field types, default value, timestamps, and rollback method.
 If a requests table already exists, document the conflict and resolve it without silently
 deleting existing records.
10. Run the migration and check its status:
 php artisan migrate
 php artisan migrate:status
 Capture screenshots showing that the migration succeeded and is marked as run.
 Correct any connection or migration error before continuing.
11. Open the same MySQL database in phpMyAdmin or another MySQL client. Inspect the
 requests table structure and verify the columns and types. Capture a screenshot showing
 the database and table names.
12. Insert three realistic sample requests using fictitious names and email addresses. Every row
 must have a positive quantity, purpose, and pending status. Omit the status value for at
 least one row to test the default.
13. Display the three records using the Browse view or a query such as:
 SELECT id, requester_name, item_name, quantity, status FROM requests;
 Capture the results. Identify the row that proves the default status was applied, and
 briefly explain how the records verify the table.
14. Update README.md with the request table fields, the migration command, the steps to
 verify the table, and the three user stories or a link to their documentation. Retain the setup
 and database-name instructions from Laboratory 1.
15. Check git status and confirm that .gitignore still excludes .env. Commit the migration
 and README update with a meaningful message:
 git add database/migrations README.md
 git commit -m "Add request data model and migration"
16. Push the commit to the same GitHub repository used in Laboratory 1. Confirm that the
 migration and updated README are visible there and that the actual .env file is absent.
Specific Outputs
Submit the following:
 1. Documentation containing three user stories and at least six testable acceptance criteria
 2. One table request data model diagram and data dictionary, including the quantity and status
 explanations
 3. Laravel migration file with working up() and down() methods
 4. Working MySQL requests table containing three fictional sample rows
 5. Updated README.md and a new meaningful Git commit
 6. Clickable link to the same GitHub repository from Laboratory 1
 7. Required screenshots showing the migration, table structure, sample rows, README, and
 commit
Submission Instructions
Submit only one Microsoft Word document (.docx) containing the following:
1. Cover details: student name, course/year/section, project title, Laboratory 2 title, and date.
2. Three user stories and at least two measurable acceptance criteria for each.
3. Request table diagram and data dictionary with field names, types, constraints, and purposes.
4. Copy or readable screenshots of the migration showing up() and down().
5. Screenshots of successful php artisan migrate and php artisan migrate:status.
6. Screenshots of the MySQL table structure and three sample rows, including evidence that an
omitted status became pending.
7. A short verification paragraph, evidence of the updated README and new Git commit, and a
clickable GitHub repository link.
The GitHub repository must contain the Laravel project, migration file, and updated README. Do
not upload the actual .env file, passwords, tokens, or a MySQL .sql export. Sample rows need
only be shown in the Word document.

File name: Surname1_FirstName1_Surname2_FirstName2_Lab2.docx
