Laboratory 3
SECURE REQUEST ACCESS THROUGH REVIEWED CHANGES
Manage reviewed code changes, resolve a merge conflict, and implement and test server-side access and input
controls in the request system from Laboratory 2.
Instructions
1. Work with the same partner from Laboratory 1. Continue using the Laravel request-system project, MySQL
database, and GitHub repository you established together and updated in Laboratory 2.
2. Verify the starting checkpoint before the timed activity. The project must have working login, two fictional
student accounts, one administrator account, a ServiceRequest model mapped to the requests table, and
records linked to each student through user_id. The administrator role must be assigned through trusted setup.
If these are missing, complete an instructor-approved preparation checkpoint using reversible migrations
without deleting the Laboratory 2 records. Record the preparation commit.
3. Verify that the local .env connects to the existing MySQL database. Record the database name, Laravel version,
fictional account labels, and request IDs owned by Student A and Student B. Do not show passwords, tokens, or
.env contents.
php artisan --version
php artisan migrate:status
4. Assign one partner as the driver and the other as the reviewer. The driver implements the change; the reviewer
inspects and tests it using their own GitHub account. Record both names and responsibilities, and exchange
keyboard and testing duties during the session.
5. Open a GitHub issue titled Secure request ownership and status access. Describe the access rules and measurable
acceptance checks. In README.md, identify who maintains the policy, controller, routes, views, and tests. Add
CODEOWNERS if appropriate.
6. Check repository access and enable required pull-request review and branch protection where available. If these
settings are unavailable, document the limitation and require recorded peer approval before merging. Do not
share accounts or access tokens.
7. Start from a clean, up-to-date default branch and create a feature branch. Replace main in the commands if your
repository uses another default branch.
git switch main
git pull --ff-only origin main
git switch -c feature/lab3-secure-requests
8. Protect request routes with auth middleware while keeping login routes available to guests. Use separate
controller methods for listing, viewing, creating, and updating status. Use GET for reads, POST for creation, and
PATCH for status updates. Follow these rules: students list only their own records; an owner or administrator
may view a record; authenticated students may create requests; only an administrator may update status.
9. Create or complete ServiceRequestPolicy. Define viewAny for signed-in users, view for the owner or
administrator, create for students, and updateStatus for the administrator only. Confirm policy discovery or
register the model-policy mapping explicitly.
php artisan make:policy ServiceRequestPolicy --model=ServiceRequest
10. Enforce the relevant policy on the server before returning protected data or writing to the database. Import the
Gate facade when using Gate::authorize. A Blade @can directive may control button visibility, but server-side
authorization is still required. Choose 403 or 404 for another student’s record and apply it consistently.
Document the choice in README.md.
Gate::authorize('view', $serviceRequest);
Gate::authorize('updateStatus', $serviceRequest);
11. Scope the student list using the signed-in account ID, such as where('user_id', $request->user()->id). Apply this
rule to filters, searches, and pagination. Allow the administrator to list all requests. Determine ownership from
user_id, not requester_name or requester_email.
12. Validate student creation input on the server: item_name must be required, string, and at most 150 characters;
quantity must be required, integer, and at least 1; purpose must be required, string, and at most 2,000
characters. Keep stored values compatible with the Laboratory 2 field types and lengths.
13. Prohibit user_id, status, is_admin, and role in student creation input. Assign user_id, requester_name, and
requester_email from the signed-in account on the server. Set the initial status to pending. Students must not
assign their own role, owner ID, or approved status.
14. Authorize administrator status updates before any database write. Validate the new status against pending,
approved, or rejected, and update only status. A student must be denied even when sending a direct PATCH
request with a valid session and CSRF token.
15. Use Eloquent or parameterized queries for reads and writes. Build an explicit allowlist of validated input. Do not
use $request->all() for insertion or updating, and do not concatenate submitted values into raw SQL. Keep
model assignment settings consistent with these controls.
16. Render user-provided text through escaped Blade output. Add @csrf to POST and PATCH forms and
@method('PATCH') where needed. Keep web CSRF protection enabled.
{{ $serviceRequest->purpose }}
@csrf
@method('PATCH')
17. Confirm account creation uses Laravel password hashing. Check that .gitignore excludes .env and that
.env.example contains no real credentials. For deployed or shared environments, disable debug output and
show safe errors without SQL details or secrets. Exclude sensitive local diagnostics from screenshots.
18. Run the dependency audit and record its actual outcome. If JavaScript dependencies are used, review their audit
output too. Document findings and proposed follow-up; avoid unreviewed upgrades. Commit lock files if they
change. Explain that an exposed secret must be revoked or rotated, then removed and repository history
addressed as needed; deleting the file alone is insufficient.
composer audit
19. Complete an access and input test matrix. For every test listed below, record the expected result, actual result,
pass or fail, and evidence reference. Use separate browser sessions or log out between accounts. Run all tests
on the local test project.
Required test cases for the matrix:
T01 - Guest opens request list and detail: Login redirect or documented denial; no request data disclosed.
T02 - Student A and Student B open lists and owned records: Each sees only their own records and can open their
own details.
T03 - Each student opens the other student’s record ID directly: Chosen 403 or 404; no other-student details
disclosed.
T04 - Each student sends a status PATCH with valid session and token: Denied; the original database status remains
unchanged.
T05 - Administrator lists, views, and updates a request: All records accessible; allowed status change saved.
T06 - Quantity 0, −1, or non-integer; blank item name: Server rejects input; no invalid row saved.
T07 - Student submits user_id, status, is_admin, or role: Input rejected; ownership, role, and status not spoofed.
T08 - Text contains <b>LAB3</b> or an apostrophe: Markup shown literally; apostrophe stored safely.
T09 - Write has missing or invalid CSRF token: Live web request rejected, normally 419; database unchanged.
T10 - Administrator submits an invalid status: Validation rejects input; existing status unchanged.
20. Verify denied writes by comparing database values before and after each attempt. Use a valid session and CSRF
token for unauthorized student PATCH tests so they demonstrate authorization. Test missing or invalid CSRF
tokens through live browser or HTTP requests because Laravel normally disables CSRF middleware in automated
feature tests.
21. Update README.md with the ownership rules, chosen 403 or 404 response, route summary, setup and
migration steps, file responsibilities, and testing steps. Retain Laboratory 1 setup and database-name
instructions and Laboratory 2 data-model documentation. Check git status and secret exclusion before staging
changes.
git status
22. Commit the implementation and README with a meaningful message, push the feature branch, and open a pull
request targeting main. Link the issue using its actual number, such as Closes #1. Summarize the implemented
rules, test results, denial response, and changed files.
git commit -m "Secure request ownership and status access"
git push -u origin feature/lab3-secure-requests
23. Have the reviewer inspect authentication, policy enforcement, list scoping, trusted field assignment, validation,
escaping, CSRF, secret exclusion, and test evidence. Add at least one substantive review comment. Address the
comment and record peer review; the author must not approve their own change.
24. Resolve the instructor’s prepared README conflict. The instructor must prepare divergent changes to the same
README line from a common base. With the feature branch checked out, fetch and merge origin/main. Capture
the conflict message and conflict markers before editing. Preserve both intended instructions, remove the
markers, stage the resolved file, commit, and push. Do not blindly select one entire file. If no conflict appears,
obtain the prepared conflicting branch and document the actual resolution.
git fetch origin
git merge origin/main
git status
git add README.md
git commit -m "Resolve README instructions conflict"
git push origin feature/lab3-secure-requests
25. Retest owner access, another student’s denial, and administrator access after resolving the conflict. Have the
reviewer recheck the final revision and record approval after all fixes. Identify any unresolved failure accurately
instead of marking it as passed.
26. Merge the approved pull request and pull the updated main branch locally. Record the clickable pull-request
link, final reviewed commit SHA, and resulting merge or squash commit SHA. Confirm the complete secure
project can be reproduced from the repository.
git switch main
git pull --ff-only origin main
27. Capture readable screenshots and prepare one Word document per pair. Confirm the repository contains the
completed code, migrations, and README and that the actual .env file is absent.


Specific Outputs

Submit the following:

1. Working authenticated request access with server-side policies and protected routes
2. Student list scoping, ownership checks, and administrator-only status updates
3. Server-side validation, trusted field assignment, escaped Blade output, CSRF protection, and secure configuration
4. Completed access and input test matrix with readable evidence and database verification
5. GitHub issue, feature branch, reviewed pull request, and meaningful commits
6. Evidence of the README conflict, its resolution, final peer approval, and merged change
7. Updated README.md and a brief dependency-audit and exposed-secret response summary
8. Clickable repository, issue, and pull-request links, plus final reviewed and merged commit SHAs
Submission Instructions
Submit only one Microsoft Word document (.docx) per pair containing the following:
1. Cover details: both students’ full names, course/year/section, project title, Laboratory 3 title, date, and
driver/reviewer responsibilities
2. Starting checkpoint: database name, Laravel version, preparation commit, fictional account labels, and owned
request IDs without passwords or credentials
3. Readable code excerpts or screenshots showing policies, routes, list scoping, validation, trusted field assignment,
escaped output, and CSRF fields
4. Completed test matrix with expected result, actual result, pass/fail, and numbered evidence references
5. Screenshots showing guest behavior, owner access, direct other-student denial, and administrator access and
status updates
6. Database evidence before and after denied and allowed writes, plus evidence of invalid input and CSRF rejection
7. Dependency-audit summary and a short explanation of password hashing, secret exclusion, safe errors, and
exposed-secret handling
8. Evidence of the updated README, meaningful commits, substantive review comments, final approval, conflict
markers, resolved README, and merged pull request
9. A short verification paragraph explaining the chosen 403/404 response and test results, clickable
repository/issue/pull-request links, and final reviewed and merged commit SHAs
The GitHub repository must contain the Laravel project, completed security changes, all required migrations, and
updated README. Do not upload the actual .env file, passwords, tokens, or a MySQL .sql export. Use fictional
account information and redact sensitive evidence.
File name: Surname1_FirstName1_Surname2_FirstName2_Lab3.docx


read the lab-3-instructions.txt file in the root folder so we can do the activity step by step, remember to leave the important task to me to get the screenshots, such as stuffs i can do on cmd or phpmyadmin or anything requiired in the instruction, i need screenshots as evidence i am the one created the system and coding

